Once around Lambda Orionis.
So, this is
a region at the head of Orion, Orion the
Hunter. I expect everybody knows Orion.
It's so prominent in the winter sky in
the northern hemisphere and seen from
much of the world. Um it's upside down
when you look at it from the southern
hemisphere, of course, and uh that
always confuses me when I travel from
one end of the earth to the other.
But, we find we have the four bright
stars at the corner.
Betelgeuse top left, Rigel at the
bottom.
Top right is Bellatrix, top uh and lower
left is Saiph. And then we have Orion's
belt in the middle going from left to
right. We have Alnitak, Alnilam, and
Mintaka making up this very striking
group. But,
Orion, he has the belt, he has the
shoulders and the knees marked out by
those bright stars, but he has a very
small weedy head, which is marked by
Lambda Orionis. I've put a big ring
round it in red there.
This is 1,300 light-years away. So, a
little closer than some of the objects
in Orion, but they're all somewhere
around 1,300 to 1,600 light-years from
us.
Now, Lambda Orionis has a name and it's
Meissa.
And this comes from the Arabic and means
the shining one.
But, the original name in Arabic was Al
Hakah.
The white spot.
Very appropriate.
Meissa was the name used for another
star, Gamma Geminorum in the
constellation of Gemini, but a mistake
was made when compiling the catalogs
couple of hundred years ago and somehow
it got transposed. And so, Lambda
Orionis got given the name Meissa and
that now has become the official name.
Um so, these errors can get fossilized
sometimes.
Looking at it, we zoom in, we see
a bright star of magnitude 3.3.
Fainter than Rigel, which is magnitude
zero. So,
a modest star to look at, not terribly
bright, but in enough to easily see it
under most conditions.
And if you look at it, you find that
there are two components. Need a
telescope. They're four arc seconds
apart.
Uh but, amateur telescopes can split
that main star and show you that it's at
at least a double.
It's part of a cluster.
The Lambda Orionis cluster, also
cataloged as the in the Collinder
catalog, Collinder 69.
And Meissa, the main star, Lambda
Orionis alpha, is the
5 million-year-old member of this
cluster. It's going around the galaxy
with the rest of the cluster in a period
of about 227 million years. So, a little
bit shorter orbit than that of the sun,
which is about 250 million.
Um and somewhere between 25,000
and 28,000 light-years away from the
course uh from the core of the galaxy.
So, a slightly closer than we are.
But, it's wandering up and down. It
crosses the galactic plane. It's orbit
takes it above and below the plane of
the galaxy once every 33 million years.
The sun, Sol, does that as well in 27
million years, I think it is.
Now, this cluster contains lots of stars
and there are lot of young stars, a lot
of low-mass protostars,
stars that are still in the process of
collapsing under gravity and it's the
gravitational energy that's powering
them. So, uh young T Tauri stars in the
so-called T Tauri stage. There'll be a
video about T Tauri stars themselves
coming down the pipe at some point soon.
And quite a lot of brown dwarfs, failed
stars, have been detected. Um including
LORY, one of those acronyms, 167, which
is a pair of planetary mass brown
dwarfs, really. Uh a planet and a brown
dwarf orbiting each other. So, somewhat
less massive than a star.
And quite a few of these young stars
have also got dust disks around them and
are therefore candidates for their own
planetary systems. So, there's a lot of
work going to be happening looking in
detail at these
young stars.
When we zoom in on them, we find some
interesting things already.
If we look at the two main components
that you can see with amateur equipment,
A and B, you can see that in the central
rectangle of the photograph on the right
there.
You can also, if you dig deeper, and you
can tell this is a James Webb space
telescope picture because of the
hexagonal nature of the diffraction
spikes over the bright star there. Um we
picked up a third component, C, which is
somewhat redder in color there and
marked with the arrow. So, a triple
star. And if we look at those
individually for a moment, the A star is
a very bright
O9 class massive star, 34 solar masses,
10 times the diameter of Sol, 200,000
times the power output, scorchingly hot
at 36,000 Kelvin. The sun, remember, is
under 6,000. So, over six times the
temperature.
And despite
being only a a little further away, uh
sorry, a little
uh
further away than Rigel, it appears
fainter. And this is because most of the
power output is coming out in the
ultraviolet part of the spectrum. So,
it's much more powerful than it appears
to the eye because a lot of the energy
is in light we cannot see.
We can age these things using various
methods to do with the uh
elements that they have created
themselves and the original chemical
makeup.
And we can figure out that this one is
about 4.2 million years old. So, not the
4.6 billion of Sol, but 4.2 million, a
thousand times less aged than our sun.
Really very early stage indeed. But,
these massive stars live fast and die
young.
Now, the A star's been reported as
having a planetary companion back in
2018.
But, we're not sure because we haven't
been able to track it down since. So,
again, we're we're looking for that one.
And the B star,
little bit less massive, 10 solar
masses, four times the diameter of Sol,
still 25,400
Kelvin
um and 6,300 times the power output. So,
it's still much more powerful and
bright, more massive and shorter-lived
than our sun. But, there's something
curious about this in that the age
estimates suggest it's much younger at
1.8 million years, not the 4.2 million
years of the A star that seems to be in
orbit with it.
The C companion, that's a bit more
sun-like, an F8 class star. So, on the
cool end of the F category. Uh the sun
is at the hot end of the next category,
G. So, it's just a little bit more more
powerful, little hotter and more massive
than the sun, but again, very, very
young. And uh we're talking millions of
years, not billions here. And this may
have a brown dwarf companion as well.
So, there's a lot going on and a lot
more to uncover in these three stars.
There are also a couple of low-mass
companions. So, we've zoomed out a bit
here. Again, we've got the A and B stars
in the center as the very white, very
high temperature region. The C star
cooler below them. But, with the boxes
around them, there are two low-mass
companions that look like comets because
they have tails. And this is the power
output mostly of Meissa, the Lambda
Orionis A star, pouring out radiation
and stripping the atmosphere, it's the
envelopes, away from these low-mass
companions and ionizing the hydrogen to
make it glow with that characteristic
red color. And you can also see quite a
lot of the red material, which may or
may not be associated with material
stripped from the C star by a similar
method at the bottom there. So,
photoevaporation
of their outer envelopes caused by the
enormous power of the O class blue giant
star, Meissa.
Zooming further out, there is a huge
ring around this grouping,
12 degrees of arc to our point of view,
covering a a very large area of sky.
And this is the remnants of a type two
supernova.
It's probably the explosion of an even
more massive and even shorter-lived
member of the Lambda Orionis cluster.
And it exploded about 1 million years
ago,
showering all of that debris out across
space. Now, we we don't have any
evidence of that having effects here on
Earth. So, maybe the fallout hasn't
arrived yet. I don't know.
But, it can also explain one weird thing
about Meissa, which is that it's moving
rapidly. It looks like this explosion
gave Meissa a bit of a kick and kicked
it sideways.
And there's also a possibility that this
explosion and the material going out
from it
maybe associated with Gerringa, the
neutron star pulsar in the constellation
next door on the boundaries of Gemini.
Um it's rather a long way, but it's
possible that that may be the neutron
star flying the opposite direction away
from the explosion. So, these might all
be related, the Lambda Orionis cluster,
exploding star within that creating all
of that nebulosity, and this being the
neutron star that was from the type two
core collapse supernova.
And it's possible that this was close
enough to have been responsible for
blowing a huge void called the local
bubble in which the sun is currently
living and moving through at the moment.
Uh a relative void in the interstellar
medium could be the bubble resulting
from this explosion.
Um now, it might not be this star, and
there have been some suggestions that
stars in the Pleiades might have been
responsible for all of this. So, it's uh
still a case that the jury is out on
that one.
Another image for you here, which is
taken by the Spitzer Space Telescope. Um
and there is a blue-white star
surrounded by material in that ring
around Lambda Orionis. I put this one in
just really because it's such a
beautiful image. Um and again, taken
with Spitzer.
The light from Meissa uh illuminating
the entire region around it.
The hydrogen gas glowing in ordinary
visible light this time, creating SH2,
the Sharpless Catalog
edition two  264 region.
That's a terrible name. The Angelfish
Nebula. Can you see the angelfish with
its nose to the right? It's just going
off the top of the screen, but I I can
see that. It looks like an angelfish to
me. And so, that's really what we
perhaps should call it. And so, here's
that Angelfish Nebula image without any
clutter. I just think that's absolutely
beautiful. Lambda Orionis right in the
center there.
And
there's a dark cloud down towards the
tail of the
region there, and that is Barnard 30.
Barnard E.E. Barnard has a catalog of a
lot of nebulous material, in particular
a lot of dark nebulae. And this is a
dark nebula in which a lot of young
stars and brown dwarfs are forming.
Again, around that two to three million
years old. So, a bit younger than some
of the elements of the Lambda Orionis
cluster, perhaps showing how this has
performed stars in a number of epochs.
Um and a lovely photograph again, and
there's another one, Barnard 35, another
part of the cluster. This is really just
me showing you a whole lot of absolutely
beautiful photographs of this part of
the sky. I think they're just too
stunning to miss. So, that's uh once
around Barnard's Loop, and thank you
very much for listening to that. Hope
you've enjoyed that one.